creates the ai-powered-npc blog post (#104)
mml-io/mml-website: src/content/blogPosts/ai-powered-npc/body.mdx

# AI-Powered NPC with MML
_[Marco Gomez](https://x.com/TheCodeTherapy) - 2024-11-08_

The possibility of having your MML documents communicate with external APIs single-handedly opens up a whole world of possibilities to create immersive functionalities for your virtual world powered by MML.

> The one we will showcase in this Blog Post is the creation of an AI-powered NPC with MML using OpenAI Agents.

Author: fixed.

> The one we will showcase in this Blog Post is the creation of an AI-powered NPC with MML using OpenAI Agents.

Author: just re-added the bit.

> That will allow you to use your preferred ChatGPT model to interact with your users, with the extra benefit of giving the agent information about your project so your NPC can not only entertain but also teach your users about your project.

Author: fixed.

> The same framework can be replicated to create game NPCs, and it can be executed in just a few steps.

Author: fixed.

  ---

  # Handling Timeout with Speech Generation

    To avoid the NPC getting stuck if the TTS API takes too long to respond, we wrap the `createSpeech()` function with a timeout using `createSpeechWithTimeout()`:

    ```js
    async function createSpeechWithTimeout(tts) {
      const timeoutPromise = new Promise((_, reject) =>
        setTimeout(() => reject(new Error("Timeout: Speech creation took too long")), completionTimeout)
      );

      try {
        await Promise.race([createSpeech(tts), timeoutPromise]);
      } catch (error) {
        console.warn(error.message);
      }
    }
    ```

    Explanation:

    - `Promise.race()`: This method runs both the speech creation and the timeout in parallel. If the TTS API call takes longer than the `completionTimeout`, the timeout promise rejects, and we handle the error gracefully;

    - Error Handling: If the timeout occurs, it logs a warning message, preventing the NPC from getting stuck waiting for a response.

    This mechanism ensures that the NPC remains responsive, even if the TTS API is slow or unresponsive.

  ---

  # Estimating the MP3 Duration

>     To synchronize animations and audio playback, I need an estimate of the MP3 file's duration. This is handled by the `estimateMP3Duration()` function, which analyzes the binary structure of the MP3 file.

Author: fixed.

  Additionally, there is a mechanism to reset the NPC's state when no users are nearby or when it hasn't received a message for a certain period. This helps prevent the NPC from getting "stuck" and keeps the experience smooth and seamless.

  Let's break down the code and explain how each part contributes to these functionalities:

  ---

  - Setting Up the Probes:

    The MML document defines two probes that handle proximity detection and chat messages:

    ```html
    <m-position-probe id="position-probe" range="10" debug="false"></m-position-probe>
    <m-chat-probe id="chat" range="10" debug="false"></m-chat-probe>
    ```

    Explanation:

    - `m-position-probe`: Detects users within a 10-meter range of the NPC. It tracks users entering, moving, and leaving this proximity;

    - `m-chat-probe`: Listens for chat messages sent by users within a 10-meter range. This probe captures the content of the chat and the user's connection ID;

    These probes make the NPC aware of its surroundings and allow it to interact with nearby users effectively.
  
  ---

  - Tracking Nearby Users with the `proximityMap`:

>     To keep track of users in the NPC's vicinity, I use a Map object called `proximityMap`. This stores the connection IDs of nearby users and their positions.

Author: fixed.

    - `disconnected` window event listener: detects if a user left the experience (closed the window) and, if so, removes the user from the `proximityMap`.

    These event listeners make the NPC context-aware, allowing it to adjust its behavior based on who is nearby.

  ---

  # Listening for Chat Messages

    The chat probe captures chat messages from users within range and forwards them to the message queue for processing.

    ```js
    chat.addEventListener("chat", (event) => {
      latestMessageTime = document.timeline.currentTime;
      const { message, connectionId } = event.detail;
      submitMessage(message, connectionIdToUserId(connectionId));
    });
    ```

    Explanation:

    - `latestMessageTime`: Tracks the time of the most recent message received. This helps determine if the NPC should reset its state due to inactivity;

    - `submitMessage()`: Sends the captured message to the queue, where it will be processed by the NPC;

    This setup allows the NPC to respond only to users who are close by, creating a more personal and immersive experience.
  
  ---

  # Resetting the NPC State:

>     To prevent the NPC from getting stuck in a particular state (e.g., "Thinking..."), I implemented a mechanism to reset its state when there are no nearby users or when it hasn't received a message for a certain duration.

Author: fixed

    ```js
    function checkIfHasNearbyUsers() {
      if (responseInProgress) return;

      if (proximityMap.size === 0) {
        const diff = Math.ceil((document.timeline.currentTime - latestProximityActivity) / 1000);
        if (diff > 10) responseLabel.setAttribute("content", initialText);
      } else {
        const diff = Math.ceil((document.timeline.currentTime - latestMessageTime) / 1000);
        if (diff > 60) {
          latestPromise = null;
          queuedMessages = [];
          responseInProgress = false;
          responseLabel.setAttribute("content", initialText);
        }
      }
    }
    ```

    Explanation:

    - `proximityMap.size`: Checks if there are any users currently in range;
    - State Reset: If there are no users nearby for more than 10 seconds, or if there hasn't been any message activity for over 60 seconds, the NPC resets its state;
    - `latestPromise` and `queuedMessages`, are cleared;
    - The NPC's label content is reset to the initial greeting (`initialText`).
    This mechanism ensures that the NPC remains responsive and doesn’t continue to display outdated or irrelevant information.

  ---

  # Periodic State Check:

>     To regularly check the proximity and message activity, I use a simple interval-based function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To regularly check the proximity and message activity there is a simple interval-based function.
```

Author: fixed.

# AI-Powered NPC with MML

> _[Marco Gomez](https://x.com/TheCodeTherapy) - 2024-11-08_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_[Marco Gomez](https://x.com/TheCodeTherapy) - 2024-12-13_
```

  In this form, you can not only describe your assistant's personality but also give it further instructions in case you want it to role-play a given character.
  
  Once you click the little diagonal arrows in the bottom-right corner of this form, it will expand so you can edit the text for the System Instructions, and there you'll also find a `Generate` button in case you want to try, which is an assisted/guided way to compose your system instructions. For the sake of this tutorial, please find below an example you can use as the `System instructions` for your assistant:

~~~markdown
You are an NPC in a virtual world. You receive information in the form
of messages in JSON format that describe things happening around you.

An example of a message that you could receive is:
```json
[{"userId":123,"type":"chat","message":"Hello!","nearbyUsers":[123],"time": 20}]
```

Sometimes the messages can include a display name of a person that is sending a message:
```json

> [{"userId":123,"displayName":"Alice","message":"My name is Alice","nearbyUsers":[123,456],"time":32}]

Author: fixed. Will be updated on my next commit.

![Configure assistant](/images/blog/ai-powered-npc/02-configure-assistant.jpg)

# Creating your NPC MML Document

Let's start diving in to the bits of the MML document that are paramount for the NPC's core functionality while keeping everything multi-user friendly.

---

# The requests queue

  Our first concern should be to keep everything multi-user friendly, and for that we must have a queue and all the book keeping necessary so we won't waste any chat messages when the NPC is already busy replying to some previous chat message sent by another user.

  For that, we create some variables to store the necessary states:

  ~~~js
  let latestPromise = null;
  let queuedMessages = [];
  let queuedResponses = [];
  let responseInProgress = false;
  ~~~

  Here's how it works:

  - `queuedMessages`: holds all the incoming messages (messages captured by the `m-chat-probe`) that need to be sent to OpenAI;

  - `queuedResponses`: stores responses we already got from OpenAI, that are waiting to be processed by the Text to Speech request (which will create the audio response), and by the functions that will perform the possible NPC actions we planned;

>   - `responseInProgress`: acts as a safeguard to inform if the NPC is currently speaking, to prevent potentially overwriting the current audio the NPC is speaking with a new audio we just got from the OpenAI Text-to-speech service.

Reviewer: The `responseInProgress` guard should probably be replaced by just making the async `sendMessages()` call also await the TTS flow so that it must complete before another can be made.

Author: @MarcusLongmuir I disagree about this one.

Current design (pipelined): OpenAI Request -> TTS/Playback (parallel).
- Message 1 -> OpenAI Request (concurrent TTS for previous response).
- Message 2 -> OpenAI Request starts immediately after Message 1's OpenAI completion.

Suggested design (sequential): OpenAI Request -> Wait for TTS -> Next request.
- Message 1 -> OpenAI Request -> Wait for TTS -> only then message 2 OpenAI request.

Depending on time and day, both OpenAI text completion requests and TTS requests can take considerable time after the user interaction, and the blocking introduced by awaiting ttsPromise can lead to significant delays, negatively impacting user experience.

I would suggest we keep the `responseInProgress` guard as it is as it ensures independent lifecycle management, allows for concurrent activities (TTS decoupled from sendMessages), and it's a future-proof design that can be extended or adapted to handle other concurrent behaviours (especially because we do have sounds, animations and actions as the result of user interaction, not only spoken responses).

Reviewer: I was suggesting this only as a simplification and I appreciate the concurrency would speed up the case where you're asking the AI to generate another response even before you've seen the current message, but that seems like an undesirable flow to be in anyway; you're not going to have seen what the AI said before it barrels into the next message.

      const duration = await estimateMP3Duration(arrayBuffer);

      const uint8Array = new Uint8Array(arrayBuffer);
      let binary = "";
      for (let i = 0; i < uint8Array.length; i++) {
        binary += String.fromCharCode(uint8Array[i]);
      }
      const base64Audio = btoa(binary);
      const dataUrl = `data:audio/mp3;base64,${base64Audio}`;

      queuedResponses.push({ dataUrl, duration, text: tts });
      processResponses();
    }
    ```

    Explanation:

    - API Request: The function sends a POST request to OpenAI's TTS API with the input text (tts), requesting an MP3 response

    - Audio Blob: The response is retrieved as a binary blob and converted into an ArrayBuffer for further processing;

    - Duration Estimation: The duration of the MP3 file is estimated to control the playback timing (more on this in the next section);

    - Base64 Encoding: The MP3 file is encoded as a Base64 data URL, making it easy to play in the browser without needing to save a file;

    - Queueing the Response: The generated audio is added to queuedResponses and processResponses() is called to handle playback;

  ---

  # Handling Timeout with Speech Generation

>     To avoid the NPC getting stuck if the TTS API takes too long to respond, I wrap the `createSpeech()` function with a timeout using `createSpeechWithTimeout()`:

Reviewer: General note: forgo first person (here and elsewhere)

    This mechanism ensures that the NPC remains responsive, even if the TTS API is slow or unresponsive.

  ---

  # Estimating the MP3 Duration

    To synchronize animations and audio playback, I need an estimate of the MP3 file's duration. This is handled by the `estimateMP3Duration()` function, which analyzes the binary structure of the MP3 file.

  ---

  # Playing the Audio

    Once the audio is ready, it's played using the `playAudio()` function. This function also manages the volume and ensures that the NPC can process the next response once playback is complete.

    ```js
    function playAudio(src, duration) {
      const now = document.timeline.currentTime;
      agentAudio.setAttribute("volume", audioVolume);
      agentAudio.setAttribute("start-time", now);
      agentAudio.setAttribute("pause-time", now + duration + audioMarginDuration);
      agentAudio.setAttribute("src", src);

      setTimeout(() => {
        agentAudio.setAttribute("volume", 0);
        setTimeout(() => {
          responseInProgress = false;
          processResponses();

>         }, audioMarginDuration / 2);

Author: fixed. The volume shouldn't need adjusting, but it helps to compensate for rare but existent timing issues that causes the very end of an audio to "stutter" (to repeat its last few milliseconds again).

    ```js
    function animate(element, attr, start, end, duration, easing) {
      const anim = document.createElement("m-attr-anim");
      anim.setAttribute("attr", attr);
      anim.setAttribute("start", start);
      anim.setAttribute("end", end);
      anim.setAttribute("start-time", document.timeline.currentTime);
      anim.setAttribute("end-time", document.timeline.currentTime + duration);
      anim.setAttribute("duration", duration);
      anim.setAttribute("easing", easing);
      anim.setAttribute("loop", false);
      element.appendChild(anim);

      setTimeout(() => {
        element.setAttribute(attr, end);
        element.removeChild(anim);
      }, duration);
    }
    ```

    Explanation:

    - Attribute Animation: Creates an `m-attr-anim` element to animate a specified attribute (e.g., position, scale, rotation);

    - Easing: Supports easing functions for smooth transitions;

    - Cleanup: The animation element is removed after the animation is complete to avoid cluttering the DOM.

>     This is a very handy utility function that I use in most of my MML documents, as it allow us to animate any element in the scene by simply specifying the target attribute and desired values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This is a very handy utility function that can be used in other MML documents, as it allow us to animate any element in the scene by simply specifying the target attribute and desired values.
```

  ---

  # Spinning the NPC

    The `spin()` function triggers a full 360-degree rotation animation, making the NPC spin around in a playful way. This action can be used as a response to user commands or AI-generated actions.

    ```js
    function spin() {
      spinAudio.setAttribute("volume", 1);
      spinAudio.setAttribute("start-time", document.timeline.currentTime);
      spinAudio.setAttribute("pause-time", document.timeline.currentTime + 6000);

      setTimeout(() => {
        spinAudio.setAttribute("volume", 0);
      }, 6000);

      animate(actionsWrapper, "ry", 0, 1800, 3500, "easeInOutQuint");
    }
    ```

    Explanation:

>     - Audio Playback: Plays a spinning sound effect using the spinAudio element that lasts 6 seconds;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Audio Playback: Plays a spinning sound effect using the `spinAudio` element that lasts 6 seconds;
```

>     - Rotation Animation: Animates the ry (rotation around the Y-axis) attribute of the `actionsWrapper` element for a 1800 degrees spin during 3.5 seconds, with an `easeInOutQuint` easing function;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Rotation Animation: Animates the `ry` (rotation around the Y-axis) attribute of the `actionsWrapper` element for a 1800 degrees spin during 3.5 seconds, with an `easeInOutQuint` easing function;
```

    This action is great for celebratory moments or playful interactions with users.

  ---

  # Growing the NPC While Speaking

    The `growWhileSpeaking()` function animates the NPC model to grow slightly when it speaks, giving a visual indication of speech and making the NPC look more dynamic and alive.

    ```js
    function growWhileSpeaking(duration) {
      animate(agentModel, "sx", 0.5, 0.6, 2000, "easeOutBack");
      animate(agentModel, "sy", 0.5, 0.6, 2000, "easeOutBack");
      animate(agentModel, "sz", 0.5, 0.6, 2000, "easeOutBack");

      setTimeout(() => {
        animate(agentModel, "sx", 0.6, 0.5, 2000, "easeInOutQuint");
        animate(agentModel, "sy", 0.6, 0.5, 2000, "easeInOutQuint");
        animate(agentModel, "sz", 0.6, 0.5, 2000, "easeInOutQuint");
      }, duration);
    }
    ```

    Explanation:

    - Scaling Up: The NPC model scales up slightly when it starts speaking;

    - Scaling Down: After the speech is complete, it scales back down to its original size.

    This subtle animation provides a visual cue that the NPC is talking, making it feel more natural and alive.
    
---

# Proximity Detection and State Reset

>   To make the NPC feel interactive and responsive, it's essential that it reacts dynamically based on the user's proximity and context. This is achieved using two key MML components: the position probe (**`m-position-probe`**) and the chat probe (**`m-chat-probe`**). These allow the NPC to detect when users enter or leave its interaction range, listen for nearby chat messages, and manage its internal state accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  To make the NPC feel interactive and responsive, it's essential that it reacts dynamically based on the users' proximity and context. This is achieved using two key MML components: the position probe (**`m-position-probe`**) and the chat probe (**`m-chat-probe`**). These allow the NPC to detect when users enter or leave its interaction range, listen for nearby chat messages, and manage its internal state accordingly.
```

>   Additionally, I've implemented mechanisms to reset the NPC's state when no users are nearby or when it hasn't received a message for a certain period. This helps prevent the NPC from getting "stuck" and keeps the experience smooth and seamless.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Additionally, there is a mechanism to reset the NPC's state when no users are nearby or when it hasn't received a message for a certain period. This helps prevent the NPC from getting "stuck" and keeps the experience smooth and seamless.
```

    - `responseInProgress` is set to `false` to allow new messages to be processed;
    - The NPC's label content is reset to the initial greeting (`initialText`).
    This mechanism ensures that the NPC remains responsive and doesn’t continue to display outdated or irrelevant information.

  ---

  # Periodic State Check:

    To regularly check the proximity and message activity, I use a simple interval-based function.

    ```js
    setInterval(() => {
      checkIfHasNearbyUsers();
    }, 1000);
    ```

    Explanation:

    The `checkIfHasNearbyUsers()` function is called every second to evaluate the NPC's state.

    This periodic check helps keep the NPC in sync with the environment and ensures it resets when needed.

  ---

  By integrating proximity detection and state-reset mechanisms, the NPC becomes highly context-aware and adaptive. It can detect when users are nearby, respond to their messages, and gracefully reset its state when interactions fade. This design prevents the NPC from getting stuck or becoming unresponsive, creating a fluid and engaging experience for users in the virtual world.

---

> 😅 Oof... that was a long one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# AI-Powered NPC with MML
_[Marco Gomez](https://x.com/TheCodeTherapy) - 2024-11-08_

The possibility of having your MML documents communicate with external APIs single-handedly opens up a whole world of possibilities to create immersive functionalities for your virtual world powered by MML.

The one we will showcase in this Blog Post is the creation of an AI-powered NPC with MML using OpenAI Agents.

That will allow you to use your preferred ChatGPT model to interact with your users, with the extra benefit of giving the agent information about your project so your NPC can not only entertain but also teach your users about your project.

> The same framwork can be replicated to create game NPCs, and it can be executed in just a few steps.

Author: fixed

```

Sometimes the messages can include a display name of a person that is sending a message:
```json
[{"userId":123,"displayName":"Alice","message":"My name is Alice","nearbyUsers":[123,456],"time":32}]
```

The `nearbyUsers` array indicates which users are within 10m of you.
If someone was nearby and now isn't then they may have walked away.
You can use the fact that multiple users are nearby to introduce them to each other if they haven't met.
Sometimes they might talk nearby to you and you could chime in and try to help them.
Try to associate names with userIds if people provide their names.
Don't refer to users by their numeric id.

The `time` field is a number of seconds that have elapsed since the start of the scene. You can therefore reference how long ago something happened.

You can send messages to users by replying with a JSON format message like the following:

```json
{"message":"This is from the NPC","userId":`${userId}`}
```

You should eventually encourage users to tell you their names.
If you already asked a user for its name, and the user said its name to you, then you should reply with a
JSON format message like the following:

```json

> {"message":"This is from the NPC","userId":`${userName}`}

Author: It is challenging to immediately spot that the NPC is replying to your particular question when there are multiple users talking. The plan here was to make sure a property is available to create a separate and easily identifiable visual indicator (which I illustrated working before, but didn't get into the blog post as it was already too long). I'd recommend we leave it for a potential future post where we show how to extend the NPC functionality.

> {"message":"This is from the NPC","userId":`${userName}`}

Author: fixed. Will be updated on my next commit.

YOU MUST ONLY REPLY WITH JSON. THE JSON MUST BEEN JUST AN OBJECT. DO NOT INCLUDE MARKDOWN SYNTAX. DO NOT INCLUDE ATTRIBUTIONS OR REFERENCES TO FILES.
~~~

  Please keep in mind that you may include much more information to your assistant in this form. You may add any knowledge you'd like your NPC to have and also allow it to have many more actions, as you may easily create the functions in your MML document for your NPC to perform the actions it was instructed to be capable of doing.

- **Model**: The **`Model`** drop-down selector will allow you to pick which ChatGPT model you want to use for your assistant. Please keep in mind this choice will influence not only the cost of each request but also the time necessary for the Assistant to reply and the number of tokens (text) it is capable of handling or "remembering" in the context of its chat with your users.

- **Response format**: The **`Response format`** is paramount for this particular guide to work, and it **must** be set to `json_object`. That is not mandatory for you to create an MML NPC using OpenAI Assistants, but only the way the example created for this particular guide was structured.

>   As you may have noticed, in the `Tools` section of the Assistants configuration page, there is a `File search` functionality that you may use to add files (like .pdf documents, markdown files, text documents, etc) so your NPC can consult to answer about specific topics described in such documents. However, we decided not to use this functionality for this particular example, as the agent tends to reply with citation marks informing where in such documents it found any given information, which would not be so useful for the particular type of NPC we decided to create for this guide. You may feel free to explore such functionality, however, keep in mind that for now **you can't use this functionality while having the `Response format` set to `json_object`, which is necessary for this particular guide to work.

Author: fixed

  - `hideWaiting()`: Resets the "Thinking..." indicator after the response is processed.

  The queue system is essential for handling multi-user interactions effectively. Without this, any new message that arrives while the NPC is busy would be lost or cause overlapping API requests. By processing messages sequentially and tracking the response state, the NPC can handle multiple users smoothly, providing a responsive and immersive experience in the virtual world.

  This approach ensures that the NPC is never overwhelmed with requests, and users get their responses in a fair and orderly manner. It's a simple yet powerful way to manage interactions in a multi-user environment, so you can keep this model in mind for different functionalities that involves dealing with external APIs.

>   Here follows the MML document we prepared to be your NPC:

Author: residual from a previous version of the blog post. removed.
